Hello there.
In this video, we are quickly going to go over the history of support in C++ for concurrency.
If we go back to the very early days when the C language was developed for writing the Unix operating
system.
We could create a new process by calling the fork() function in the operating system API.
This would create a new copy that was almost an exact copy of the original, except for some book keeping
details.
You could also create a "pipe" which allows data to flow between the parent and the child. You had the
option to make the child process run a different program from the parent.
So it would load up the instruction codes for a different executable.
And in fact, that's how the Unix [command line] shell executes.
When C++ came along, for many years, there was nothing special about C++.
There were various ways: you could do it in C, you could still go to the Unix API or the Windows API.
There was also a library called pthreads, which worked with POSIX systems. Which basically means Unix
or anything that is very good at pretending to be Unix.
And finally there is the open MP library, which was and perhaps still is very popular in numeric processing.
So you can write code which loops over arrays. It looks like C, but it can do it in parallel so it can use
multiple processors if you have them.
And later, in the 1990s onwards.
Various libraries for doing threading in C++ appeared. ACE was in the mid 90s. It is a very big, clunky library,
mainly intended for networking, written in typical 1990s C++ code.
The Boost library, which was developed by people who are trying to get features into C++, the library was basically
a kind of testbed to show that these features could be developed and they were useful, and they did actually
succeed in getting a fair number of these features added to C++ 11.
Boost has support for threads.
It was basically a wrapper around whatever facilities the operating system provided, but it did mean
that you had a consistent interface and you could write the same code on anywhere that had a C++ compiler.
And then there's also Poco, which is a more modern and lightweight version of ACE, so that is,
again, mainly networking, but it does have thread support as well.
And finally, 2011. This is quite ironic because when Bjarne Stroustrup first got his "C with classes"
language working, the first thing he did was writing a task management library with coroutines.
That was 1980, and it took another 31 years before he could get threading into the standard. Anyway,
in C++11
we now have a thread-safe standard library so we can use all the standard containers and algorithms with threads.
Again, we need to be a little bit careful like we do with all data.
It also provided a memory model and atomic operations.
So this means that programmers can write code
using threads, which is efficient and portable, and the behaviour of the code is well defined (unless
you make a mistake, in which case it isn't defined, which is the same as everything else in C++.)
And it also gives you the possibility to have fine grained control over the exact operations at low
levels.
And finally, which we are mainly going to concentrate on in this course, features for creating
and managing threads which were provided in the standard library.
Then there have been developments since then. C++14 added read-write locks. C++17 added versions of standard
algorithms which can execute in parallel, if the hardware supports this and the compiler writers have
implemented it.
C++20 adds coroutines, joining threads and has better facilities for synchronizing between threads.
So we are going to look at some of that later in the course.
But we're only going to consider the standard C++ features in this course, so we are not going to cover
pthreads or Boost or anything else.
Okay.
And that's it for this video.
I'll see you next time.